Add orbital quickstart (#3)
skaltman/sfquickstarts-posit: tidymodel-prediction-workflows-inside-snowflake-with-orbital/tidymodel-prediction-workflows-inside-snowflake-with-orbital.md

author: Sara Altman
id: tidymodel-prediction-workflows-inside-snowflake-with-orbital
summary: Tidymodel Prediction Workflows Inside Snowflake with Orbital
categories: Data-Science
environments: web
status: Published
feedback link: https://github.com/Snowflake-Labs/sfguides/issues
tags: Data Science, R, Posit Workbench, Native Applications 

#  Tidymodel Prediction Workflows Inside Snowflake with Orbital

## Overview
Duration: 1

### Overview

This Quickstart will demonstrate how to run model predictions inside Snowflake
using the [orbital R package](https://orbital.tidymodels.org/) and the [Snowflake Native Posit Workbench App](https://app.snowflake.com/marketplace/listing/GZTSZMCB69/posit-pbc-posit-workbench?search=posit+pbc). 

With the orbital package, you can:

1. Speed up model predictions by running them directly in a database like Snowflake.
2. Easily share your models with others by storing predictions in a Snowflake table or view. 

We'll use loan data from [LendingClub](https://www.lendingclub.com/) to build an 
example model in this Quickstart. 

### What You'll Need

> - Familiarity with R
> - Familiarity with modeling in R with the [tidymodels framework](https://www.tidymodels.org/) 
> - The ability to launch Posit Workbench from [Snowflake Native Applications](https://docs.posit.co/ide/server-pro/integration/snowflake/native-app/). This can be provided by an administrator with the `accountadmin` role.
> - A Snowflake account with an `accountadmin` role or role that allows you to:
>   - Create databases, schemas and tables
>   - Create stages
>   - Load data from S3

Author: ```suggestion
- Familiarity with R
- Familiarity with modeling in R with the [tidymodels framework](https://www.tidymodels.org/) 
- The ability to launch Posit Workbench from [Snowflake Native Applications](https://docs.posit.co/ide/server-pro/integration/snowflake/native-app/). This can be provided by an administrator with the `accountadmin` role.
- A Snowflake account with an `accountadmin` role or role that allows you to:
  - Create databases, schemas and tables
  - Create stages
  - Load data from S3
- Access to [Posit Connect](https://posit.co/products/enterprise/connect/)
```

### What You’ll Learn

> - How to create a tidymodels workflow that bundles pre-processing, modeling, and post-processing steps. 

Reviewer: We mention post-processing here but the workflow we include doesn't include any post-processing

> - How to create a tidymodels workflow that bundles pre-processing, modeling, and post-processing steps. 

Author: ```suggestion
- How to create a tidymodels workflow that bundles pre-processing and modeling steps. 
```

- How to transform that workflow into Snowflake SQL with orbital. 
- How to run model predictions on Snowflake using orbital. 
- How to create Snowflake views to store and share model predictions. 

### What You’ll Build

- An RStudio Pro IDE environment to use within Snowflake.
- An R Script that builds a model workflow using the tidymodels framework, then
transforms that workflow into Snowflake SQL with orbital.
- A table or view of model predictions, ready to share with others.

You can follow along with this Quickstart guide,
or look at the materials provided in the accompanying repository:
<https://github.com/posit-dev/snowflake-posit-quickstart-orbital>.

## Setup
Duration: 5

Before we begin there are a few components we need to prepare. We need to:

- Add the Lending Club data to Snowflake
- Launch the Posit Workbench Native App
- Create an RStudio Pro IDE session
- Install necessary R Packages

### Add the Lending Club data to Snowflake

For this analysis, we'll use loan data from [LendingClub](https://www.lendingclub.com/). We've made the data available in an [S3 bucket](s3://posit-snowflake-mlops).

> The data contains information for about 2.3 million loans from Southern US states.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The data contains information for about 2.3 million loans from the Southern US states.
```

#### Add data

In Snowsight, click `Create` > `SQL Worksheet`. Copy [this SQL code](https://github.com/posit-dev/snowflake-posit-quickstart-orbital/blob/main/setup.sql) and paste it
into the worksheet. Run the code to create the database and table you'll need for
this Quickstart.

> aside negative
>
> You may need to change the role granted usage from `SYSADMIN` to your desired
> role.

#### Confirm data

After running the code, you should be able to see the Lending Club data in Snowsight.

Navigate to `Data` > `Databases` and select the database where you added the data (e.g., `LENDING_CLUB`).
Expand the database, schema, and tables until you see the `LOAN_DATA` table. 

![](assets/snowflake/04-confirm_data.png)

### Launch Posit Workbench

We can now start the modeling process with the data using the [Posit Workbench Native App](https://app.snowflake.com/marketplace/listing/GZTSZMCB69/posit-pbc-posit-workbench?search=posit+pbc). 
The Posit Workbench Native App allows users to develop in their preferred IDE in 
Posit Workbench with their Snowflake data, all while adhering to Snowflake's 
security and governance protocols.

#### Step 1: Navigate to Apps

> In your Snowflake account, go to `Data Products` > `Apps` to open the Native Apps collection. If Posit Workbench is not already installed, click `Get`. Please note that the Native App must be [installed and configured ](https://docs.posit.co/ide/server-pro/integration/snowflake/native-app/install.html) by an administrator. 

Reviewer: It may be worth calling out here that installation and configuration also require a valid license file from Posit.

> In your Snowflake account, go to `Data Products` > `Apps` to open the Native Apps collection. If Posit Workbench is not already installed, click `Get`. Please note that the Native App must be [installed and configured ](https://docs.posit.co/ide/server-pro/integration/snowflake/native-app/install.html) by an administrator. 

Author: ```suggestion
In your Snowflake account, go to `Data Products` > `Apps` to open the Native Apps collection. If Posit Workbench is not already installed, click `Get`. Please note that the Native App must be [installed and configured ](https://docs.posit.co/ide/server-pro/integration/snowflake/native-app/install.html) by an administrator. Installation and configuration also require a valid license file from Posit.
```

1. **Simple copy-and-paste** Go to File > New File > R Script and then copy the contents of [fit_and_deploy.R](https://github.com/posit-dev/snowflake-posit-quickstart-orbital/blob/main/fit_and_deploy.R) into your new file.
2. **Starting a new project linked to the GitHub repo.** To do this:

    1.  Go to `File` > `New Project` in the RStudio IDE menu bar.
    
    <img src="assets/rstudio/03-new-project.png" style="width: 400px; height: auto;" />

    2.  Select Version Control in the New Project Wizard

    <img src="assets/rstudio/04-project-wizard.png" style="width: 400px; height: auto;" />

    3.  Select Git

    <img src="assets/rstudio/05-git.png" style="width: 400px; height: auto;" />

    4.  Paste the [URL](https://github.com/posit-dev/snowflake-posit-quickstart-orbital) of the GitHub repo and click Create Project

    <img src="assets/rstudio/06-create-project.png" style="width: 400px; height: auto;" />

    RStudio will clone a local copy of the materials on GitHub. You can use the Files pane in the bottom right-hand corner of the IDE to navigate to `quarto.qmd`. Click on the file to open it.

> aside negative
> 

> > SSH authentication is not available in Snowpark Container Services, so when creating projects from Git, you may need to authenticate Git operations over HTTPS, using a username and password or a personal access token.

Reviewer: It's also possible to use [SSH over the HTTPS port](https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/troubleshooting-ssh/using-ssh-over-the-https-port), but that may be beyond the scope of this quickstart

library(DBI)
library(dbplyr)
library(dplyr)
library(glue)
library(arrow)
library(stringr)
library(tidymodels)
library(vetiver)
library(rsconnect)
library(pins)
library(orbital)
library(tidypredict)
library(ggplot2)
```

## Access and prepare Snowflake data from R
Duration: 5

Before starting the modeling process, we need to connect to our database and load
the loan data. 

We'll use the DBI and odbc R packages to connect to the database. We'll then use dplyr and dbplyr to query the data with R without having to write raw SQL. To learn more, see [Analyze Data with R using Posit Workbench and Snowflake](https://quickstarts.snowflake.com/guide/analyze_data_with_r_using_posit_workbench_and_snowflake/#0).

### Connect with DBI

First, we use `DBI::dbConnect()` to connect to Snowflake. We'll also need a driver
provided by the odbc package. The `warehouse`, `database`, and `schema` arguments
specify our desired Snowflake warehouse, database, and schema. 

```r
con <- dbConnect(
  odbc::snowflake(),
  warehouse = "DEFAULT_WH",
  database = "LENDING_CLUB",
  schema = "ML"
)
```

> aside negative
>
> You may need to change `warehouse`, `database`, and `schema` to match your environment.

> `con` now stores our connection. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`con` now stores our Snowflake connection. 
```

<img src="assets/rstudio/02-connections.png" style="width: 400px; height: auto;" />

### Create and manipulate a `tbl`

Once we build a connection, we can use `dplyr::tbl()` to create `tbl`s. A tbl is an R object that represents a table or view accessed through a connection.

```r
con |> tbl("LOAN_DATA")
```

We can also use dbplyr to translate typical dplyr verbs into SQL. To prepare our
`tbl` for modeling, we'll extract the year and month information from the `ISSUE_D`
column.

```r
lendingclub_dat <- 
  con |> 
  tbl("LOAN_DATA") |>
  mutate(
    ISSUE_YEAR = as.integer(str_sub(ISSUE_D, start = 5)),
    ISSUE_MONTH = as.integer(
      case_match(
        str_sub(ISSUE_D, end = 3),
        "Jan" ~ 1,
        "Feb" ~ 2,
        "Mar" ~ 3,
        "Apr" ~ 4,
        "May" ~ 5,
        "Jun" ~ 6,
        "Jul" ~ 7,
        "Aug" ~ 8,
        "Sep" ~ 9,
        "Oct" ~ 10,
        "Nov" ~ 11,
        "Dec" ~ 12
      )
    )
  )
```

> We don't want to fit our model on all 2.3 million rows, so we'll filter to a single
> year and then sample 5,000 rows. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In many cases we may not want to fit our model on all 2.3 million rows, so we'll filter to a single
year and then sample 5,000 rows. 
```

### Fit model and compute metrics

Now that we have our workflow object `lendingclub_wf`, we can use it to fit our model. 

```r
lendingclub_fit <- 
  lendingclub_wf |> 
  fit(data = lendingclub_prep)
```

To understand how well our model performs, we define a metric set using `yardstick::metric_set()`
and then compute those metrics for `lendingclub_fit`.

```r
lendingclub_metric_set <- metric_set(rmse, mae, rsq)

lendingclub_metrics <- 
  lendingclub_fit |>
  augment(lendingclub_prep) |>
  lendingclub_metric_set(truth = INT_RATE, estimate = .pred)
```

`lendingclub_metrics` looks like this:

```
# A tibble: 3 × 3
  .metric .estimator .estimate
  <chr>   <chr>          <dbl>
1 rmse    standard       4.38 
2 mae     standard       3.43 
3 rsq     standard       0.233
```

### Version model with vetiver

The [vetiver](https://rstudio.github.io/vetiver-r/) package provides tools to version, share, 
deploy, and monitor models. 

We'll use vetiver to version and write our fitted model to a [pin](https://pins.rstudio.com/) on [Posit Connect](https://posit.co/products/enterprise/connect/). 
This will allow us to identify which version of our model is active and track

> performance against other models over time. 

Reviewer: We introduce Posit Connect here but access to Posit Connect isn't mentioned in the quickstart requirements.

Then, we create a vetiver model with `vetiver_model()`, supplying the function with our 
fitted model, model name, and metadata containing our metrics. 

```r
model_name <- "interest_rate_prediction"
v <- 
  vetiver_model(
    lendingclub_fit,
    model_name,
    metadata = list(metrics = lendingclub_metrics)
  )
```

`vetiver_pin_write()` writes the vetiver model to Posit Connect as a pin.

```r
board |> vetiver_pin_write(v)
```

> aside negative
>
> If you run into a namespacing error in Connect, or a permissioning error in Snowflake, that 
> may mean someone has already run this code with the same `model_name`. You'll need to pick 
> a different value. 

We can use `pin_versions()` to return all the different versions of this model. 

```r
model_versions <- 
  board |>
  pin_versions(glue("{board$account}/{model_name}"))
```

> aside positive
>
> Unless you've done this Quickstart multiple times, you'll probably only have 
> one model version.

Let's grab the active version of the model. We'll use this later when interacting
with Snowflake. 

```r
model_version <- 
  model_versions |>
  filter(active) |>
  pull(version)
```

At this point, we've:

> 1. Fit a model
> 2. Evaluated that model
> 3. Versioned the model with vetiver

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Fit a model
2. Evaluated that model
3. Versioned the model with vetiver
4. Stored the model as a pin on Posit Connect
```

Now, we're ready to deploy the model with orbital and Snowflake. 

## Predict with orbital and Snowflake
Duration: 10

> The orbital package allows you to run tidymodels workflow predictions inside 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [orbital package](https://orbital.tidymodels.org/) allows you to run tidymodels workflow predictions inside 
```
I know we provide this link earlier in the document and that may be the best practice to follow here. It just feels like it may be worth linking back to orbital documentation again since orbital is being formally introduced into the workflow.

databases, including Snowflake, substantially speeding up the prediction process. 

To do so, orbital converts tidymodels workflows into SQL that can run on Snowflake.
You can then either use that SQL to run the predictions of that model or deploy the

> model directly to Snowflake. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
model directly to Snowflake as a view. 
```

   <dbl>
 1  13.6
 2  17.0
 3  12.5
 4  13.6
 5  11.9
 6  16.8
 7  12.3
 8  11.3
 9  14.0
10  13.5
# ℹ more rows
# ℹ Use `print(n = ...)` to see more rows
```

> aside positive
>
> We've also used `dplyr::compute()` to force the query to compute—without `compute()`,
> `predict()` would only be evaluated lazily. `compute()` saves the results to a temporary table. 
> The `Sys.time()` calls will help us determine how fast orbital computed our predictions.

To figure out how much orbital sped up our process, let's see how many predictions
we computed:

```r
preds |> count()
```

```
# Source:   SQL [1 x 1]
# Database: Snowflake 8.44.2[@Snowflake/LENDING_CLUB]
        n
    <dbl>
1 2260702
```

as well as how much time elapsed:

```r
end_time - start_time
```

```
Time difference of 3.027164 secs
```

2,260,702 predictions in just 3.02 seconds—thanks to Snowflake and orbital!

## Deploy model as a Snowflake view
Duration: 5

Next, we'll deploy our model so others can use it. We have a couple of options.

One option is to write the predictions back to Snowflake as a permanent table by
setting `temporary = FALSE` in `compute()`:

```r
preds <- 
  predict(orbital_obj, lendingclub_dat) |>

>   compute(name = "LENDING_CLUB_PREDICTIONS")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  compute(name = "LENDING_CLUB_PREDICTIONS", temporary = FALSE)
```

```

Another is to write our model prediction function as a [view](https://docs.snowflake.com/en/user-guide/views-introduction). 

> aside positive
> 
> A view allows query results to be accessed like a table. The query will execute

> > anytime the view is called. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> anytime the view is called, and will run on any new data that has been added to the table.
```

To create this view, we first need to construct the SQL query that we want to store in the view.

```r
view_sql <-
  lendingclub_dat |>
  mutate(!!!orbital_inline(orbital_obj)) |> 
  select(any_of(c("ID", ".pred"))) |> 
  remote_query()
```

`orbital_inline()` allows us to use our orbital object in a dplyr pipeline. We can
then use `select()` to select just the columns we need for our predictions view:
`ID` (to identify the rows) and `.pred` (which contains the predictions).

`dbplyr::remote_query()` converts our dplyr pipeline back into SQL. Let's take 
a look at the result.

```r
view_sql
```

> ```

Reviewer 2: this might end up a bit messy, can you set it to auto-fold and only expand when needed? It's a big block to scroll past.

Author: I think it will auto-fold when rendered on Snowflake's site. I'm having difficult getting their previewing to work right now, but I'll confirm before making the PR.

that view.

First, we'll make a name for this new view.

```r
main_view_name <- glue::glue("{model_name}_latest")
```

Then, we again use `glue_sql()` and `dbExecute()` to create the view. 

```r
main_view_statement <- glue::glue_sql(
  "CREATE OR REPLACE VIEW {`main_view_name`} AS ",
  "SELECT * FROM {`versioned_view_name`}",
  .con = con
)

con |>
  DBI::dbExecute(main_view_statement)
```

We can take a look at this view using `tbl()` and `collect()` to pull the view into
R.

```r
con |>
  tbl(main_view_name) |>
  head(100) |>
  collect()
```

```
# A tibble: 100 × 2
   ID        .pred
   <chr>     <dbl>
 1 142212962 16.7 
 2 142529846 12.4 
 3 141649517 13.7 
 4 141671381 13.1 
 5 141449070 16.9 
 6 142661219 11.6 
 7 142647391 15.9 
 8 142646325  8.37
 9 142211815  9.98
10 142661174 11.1 
# ℹ 90 more rows
# ℹ Use `print(n = ...)` to see more rows
```

Now, we have a table of predictions we can share with others in our organization
through Snowflake. They can use our view no matter what tools they're using to interact
with Snowflake, including Snowsight, as shown below.

![](assets/snowflake/snowsight-view.png)

## Refitting models in Snowflake with Posit Connect
Duration: 1

> As new data comes in over time, it would be useful to be able to refit our model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As new data comes in over time, it is useful to refit our model.
```

We can refit periodically, monitor performance, and store the best-performing
version on Posit Connect. We won't cover this in detail here,
but we've put together sample code for the process in [this Quarto document](https://github.com/posit-dev/snowflake-posit-quickstart-orbital/blob/main/refit.qmd).

[This blog post](https://posit.co/blog/running-tidymodel-prediction-workflows-inside-databases/) also covers the process.

## Conclusion and Resources
Duration: 2

In this Quickstart, you learned how to use orbital and tidymodels to build, deploy, and run predictions directly in Snowflake. By combining the power of Snowflake with the flexibility of R, you can efficiently scale your modeling workflows and share results as views, all within a secure environment.

### What You Learned

> - How to use the Posit Workbench Native App to interact with Snowflake from the RStudio IDE.
> - How to create a tidymodels workflow with the recipes and workflows packages.
> - How to use orbital package to convert tidymodels workflows into SQL and run predictions directly inside Snowflake.
> - How to deploy predictions as Snowflake views.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- How to use the Posit Workbench Native App to interact with Snowflake from the RStudio IDE.
- How to create a tidymodels workflow with the recipes and workflows packages.
- How to use vetiver to version models and store them as pins on Posit Connect.
- How to use orbital package to convert tidymodels workflows into SQL and run predictions directly inside Snowflake.
- How to deploy predictions as Snowflake views.
```
